Big Labs, Wrappers and Stickyness 

March 12, 2025 

The business models in the AI world are still emerging and everything is very very fluid, but why not make some 
guesses, it is where all the fun is. 

For one, looks to me that the main players in the AI space will be the Big Labs (tm) and the Wrappers (also tm). The 
Big Labs are the ones that spend significant capital to build frontier models. The Wrappers are the companies
that build products on top of these frontier models serving market niches and solving specific use cases. 

Well, to start with, this view looks a bit oversimplified. Who are the big labs? I think the big labs at this 
point are OpenAI, Anthropic, Google and xAI. What about DeepSeek and all the other Chinese players? For better 
or worse, I do not think these will have a big impact in the market (ok, maybe my post is entirely focused on the 
US market). What about the other open source (ahem, I meant open weight) models, like Meta, Mistral etc. 
Again, I do not think these will have an impact, but I will get back to this later. 

Then, aren't wrappers bad? GPT wrappers did have a bad reputation, but it is not deserved. There is nothing 
wrong in wrapping an advanced frontier model in a product that serves a specific niche and use case. There is value 
in knowing this market and building the right product for it. And even if the heavy lifting in the product 
is done by a foundational model from a Big Lab, there is enough technical room for differentiation: intelligent
context management often can make all the difference in performance and as the profit margins of the 
wrappers get squeezed (a topic for another day), there will be innovations in mixing and matching different 
models with different cost profiles to get the best results with the lowest possible cost. So, Wrapper products
are not trivial (at least some of them). 

Where are the big cloud providers? Actually, I think these cloud providers will be in the background, 
providing services to the ecosystem but not very visible otherwise. Clearly, the big labs will need 
their services, and many wrappers will need to host their AI infra somewhere, but this will all be 
hidden infra costs. 

Where are the big legacy enterprises sprinkling AI as part of their offerings? These are not wrappers per se since they 
may be building their own models, fine-tuning etc but at the end they will have to buy the services 
of the cloud providers and the Big Labs. It will be business as usual for them, just selling the good old stuff 
but "with AI inside". The Wrappers are the ones that will claim new markets and unique use cases. 

So, if we agree that the main players are the Big Labs and the Wrappers, then what is next? 
Well, for one, we can tell that the offerings of the Big Labs are converging. They all offer
similar stuff even now: everyone  has voice and image generation, thinking models, tool calling models, and deep research.
Then next big things are already showing up, generalist "super" agents, computer using agents (a.k.a CUA) and then 
coding agents and so on. The will be a steady stream of new "big" things, but every Big Lab will have them.
Importantly,  not only they will have it as an offering in their Web interface, but also in their APIs. 

Now, how sticky is all this? What makes me continue using OpenAI's deep research and not switch to the 
one from Anthropic? Actually not much. Many people have accounts with all providers (especially
now that the pricing is still very low). The browser based UX is pretty similar as well. Even more intriguing, 
I do think that eventually, a wrapper will show up that will actually work better and have a cleaner UX
for some of this Web based functionality, i.e. there will be companies providing deep research functionality and 
companies that provide a better chat experience.  In the longish term, all this web based functionality 
from the Big Labs will not be that attractive anymore and it will wither. I really think that the 
monthly subscription for the Big Labs will eventually go away as a consumption model and everything 
will be API usage. The Big Labs may not be too happy with this, and they did try offering other 
add-on services like fine-tuning of models (which never did take off) or hosting of the AI infra. 
Maybe hosting will succeed, but it becomes another hidden cost like the cloud provider one.

So, now the picture is quite simple: very few Big Labs offering their services through APIs, and 
an astonishing amount of Wrappers peddling their wares for a monthly subscription. All the other costs 
of the AI ecosystem, hosting, cloud infra and such will be hidden behind these two costs. And the API costs will 
be hidden by the end users that will consume "AI" though the Wrappers as a monthly subscription. After 
all is said, AI will be experienced for n $/month. 

The dynamics of this ecosystem, especially when it comes to pricing power and profit margins are going to be 
fun to watch as they evolve and will be a topic for another post. 

Before I go, few last words for the open weight models. My view is that open weight models will not match the 
top frontier models in performance. The frontier models will keep getting the new "hot" capabilities (fine-tuned for 
tool calling, CUA, better support for agents, better tools, better alignment and red teaming) and it will be very 
hard to the open weight ecosystem to catch up.  If I am a Wrapper, it will be much easier for me to go directly to one of the Big Labs and 
get what I need instead of trying to piece together a solution with open weight models. The Big Labs provide different models with 
different price points so Wrappers can optimize their costs. Plus the open weight ecosystem 
is really very small, outside META there is no other credible providers in the US. There are few in China (DeepSeek anyone?)
that for obvious reasons will not work very well in the US market. Other players like Mistral and NVIDIA are too small 
or not too focused. Note that it is not enough to release one model, it will take continuous effort to keep updating these 
models as the technology improves. This is a long term commitment that I am not sure that even META will continue. 
Of course Big Labs will and do open source some of the models, but as for example in the case of Grok from xAI, these are the older 
non competitive versions. 




